================================
What's new in Pigweed: June 2026
================================

.. changelog_highlights_start

Highlights:

* :ref:`changelog-2026-06-token-rust-detokenizer` - The initial support
  includes loading token databases from CSV and binary formats, configuring
  custom prefix characters, and detokenizing text. Error formatting behavior
  matches the C++ version of pw_tokenizer.

* :ref:`changelog-2026-06-log-pw_assert` - The new Rust crate provides
  crash-safe assert and panic macros for embedded systems where standard
  library panics might not be suitable, or where specific logging/recovery
  behavior is needed.

* :ref:`changelog-2026-06-time-pw_time` - The initial Rust
  crate supports time, instants, and durations.

* :ref:`changelog-2026-06-data-protobuf-buffer-encoder` - The new
  ``BufferEncoder`` C++ class provides zero-copy in-place message serialization
  with significant speedups.

* :ref:`changelog-2026-06-async-async2-generators` -
  pw_async2 now supports C++20 coroutine generators yielding asynchronous
  value streams via ``co_yield`` and ``Next()``.

.. changelog_highlights_end

---------------
Arch interfaces
---------------

.. _changelog-2026-06-arch-rp2350-zephyr-support:

Target platforms for RP2350
===========================
.. _hardware testing board: https://pigweed.googlesource.com/pigweed/hardware/testing/

Added Zephyr, FreeRTOS, and pw_kernel support for pw_rp2350, Pigweed's
`hardware testing board`_. CLs: `1 <https://pwrev.dev/424212>`__,
`2 <https://pwrev.dev/427274>`__, `3 <https://pwrev.dev/421492>`__

Example of building for the pw_kernel target within upstream Pigweed:

.. code-block:: console

   bazelisk build --platforms=@pigweed//targets/pw_rp2350/pigweed:pw_rp2350 \
       //targets/pw_rp2350/pigweed:sleep_example_image

.. _changelog-2026-06-arch-rust-boot-entry:

pw_boot entry attribute in Rust
===============================
The new ``#[entry]`` attribute validates that the annotated function has the
required ``fn() -> !`` signature and generates the standardized
``pw_boot_rust_entry`` symbol expected by Pigweed bootloaders and platform
targets like pw_rp2350. CLs: `1 <https://pwrev.dev/422192>`__

.. code-block:: rs

   use pw_boot::entry;

   #[entry]
   fn main() -> ! {
       pw_log::info!("Booting firmware...");
       loop {}
   }

---------------------
Async and concurrency
---------------------

.. _changelog-2026-06-async-async2-generators:

C++20 coroutine generator support in pw_async2
==============================================
Added ``Generator<T>`` and ``GeneratorPromise<T>`` to pw_async2 to support
C++20 coroutine generators that yield streams of values using ``co_yield``. The
generator object implements a ``Next()`` method returning a future that resolves
to an ``std::optional<T>``, allowing asynchronous streams to be consumed in
``while`` loops with ``co_await``. CLs: `1 <https://pwrev.dev/429376>`__, `2
<https://pwrev.dev/415139>`__

.. code-block:: c++

   pw::async2::Generator<int> CountToFive(CoroContext cx) {
     for (int i = 1; i <= 5; ++i) {
       co_yield i;
     }
   }

   pw::async2::Coro<int> SumGenerator(CoroContext cx, Generator<int>& gen) {
     int sum = 0;
     while (auto val = co_await gen.Next()) {
       sum += *val;
     }
     co_return sum;
   }

.. _changelog-2026-06-async-interrupt-spinlock:

New pw_sync_spinlock crate
==========================
The new pw_sync_spinlock Rust crate provides an ``InterruptSpinLock`` API for
protecting shared data across threads and interrupt handlers. While the lock is
held, local CPU interrupts are disabled on the calling core. The crate includes
standard library and FreeRTOS backends, with FreeRTOS critical section
management handled via ``taskENTER_CRITICAL`` and ``vTaskSuspendAll``. CLs: `1
<https://pwrev.dev/424095>`__

.. code-block:: rs

   use pw_sync_spinlock::InterruptSpinLock;

   static LOCK: InterruptSpinLock<u32> = InterruptSpinLock::new(0);

   fn increment_in_isr() {
       let mut data = LOCK.lock();
       *data += 1;
   }

---------
Bluetooth
---------

.. _changelog-2026-06-bluetooth-proxy-event-filtering:

Configurable HCI event filtering in pw_bluetooth_proxy
======================================================
Added runtime HCI event and LE Meta subevent filtering APIs to ``ProxyHost`` in
pw_bluetooth_proxy. Containers can now dynamically block or unblock specific
controller events from reaching the host using ``SetEventBlocked()`` and
``SetLeSubeventBlocked()``, query block statuses, and reset all filters via
``ResetFilters()``. CLs: `1 <https://pwrev.dev/417652>`__, `2
<https://pwrev.dev/423892>`__

.. code-block:: c++

   proxy_host.SetEventBlocked(emboss::EventCode::LE_META_EVENT, true);
   proxy_host.SetLeSubeventBlocked(emboss::LeSubEventCode::SUBRATE_CHANGE, true);

---------------------------------
C++ data structures and utilities
---------------------------------

.. _changelog-2026-06-cpp-generic-deque-insert-optimization:

GenericDeque speedup
====================
Optimized ``GenericDeque::try_insert()`` and ``try_insert_shift_right()`` in
pw_containers by splitting non-contiguous underlying storage into at most
two contiguous segments during fill and move operations. For trivially copyable
types such as ``std::byte`` or integers, the compiler can now optimize
insertions into ``memcpy()`` or block fills rather than item-by-item copies,
resulting in up to a 30x speedup on 1000-item insertions. CLs: `1
<https://pwrev.dev/429412>`__

-------------------------------
Data encoding and serialization
-------------------------------

.. _changelog-2026-06-data-protobuf-buffer-encoder:

In-memory protobuf serialization with BufferEncoder
===================================================
The new ``BufferEncoder`` and ``BufferEncoderView`` C++ APIs in pw_protobuf
enable serializing protobuf messages directly to an in-memory buffer without
scratch buffers or copying nested submessages. It utilizes in-place length
prefix patching and provides both checked and unchecked write methods (such as
``EnsureSpace()`` and ``UncheckedWrite*``), achieving an 8x speedup for checked
writes and an 18x speedup for unchecked writes compared to ``StreamEncoder``.
CLs: `1 <https://pwrev.dev/416752>`__

.. code-block:: c++

   pw::protobuf::BufferEncoder encoder(response_buffer);
   auto view = encoder.view();
   if (view.EnsureSpace(kMaxSizeBytes)) {
     view.UncheckedWriteUint32(kMagicNumberField, 0x1a1a2b2b);
     view.UncheckedWriteString(kFavoriteFoodField, "cookies");
   }

.. _changelog-2026-06-data-protobuf-find-occurrence:

Occurrence support in pw_protobuf Find APIs
===========================================
Updated pw_protobuf Find APIs (such as ``FindUint32`` and
``FindSubmessage``) and pwpb code generation to accept an ``Occurrence``
parameter (``Occurrence::kFirst`` or ``Occurrence::kLast``). When locating
scalar non-repeated fields, generated decoders now search for
``Occurrence::kLast`` by default, complying with Protobuf specification
semantics where the last occurrence wins when fields are shadowed. CLs: `1
<https://pwrev.dev/410873>`__

.. code-block:: c++

   // Spec-compliant lookup returning the last occurrence of a field
   pw::Result<uint32_t> age = pw::protobuf::FindUint32(
       buffer, Field::kAge, pw::protobuf::Occurrence::kLast);

.. _changelog-2026-06-data-rust-decode:

Base64 decoding in pw_base64 crate
==================================
Added Base64 decoding support to the pw_base64 Rust crate. The new
implementation includes functions for decoding Base64 slices in-place or to
output buffers, validating Base64 strings, and calculating decoded buffer sizes.
CLs: `1 <https://pwrev.dev/406282>`__

.. code-block:: rs

   use pw_base64::{decode, max_decoded_size};

   let mut output = [0u8; max_decoded_size(4)];
   let len = decode(b"Zm9v", &mut output).unwrap();

.. _changelog-2026-06-data-python-io:

Read and write binary integer data from Python I/O streams
==========================================================
Added the ``pw_bytes.io`` Python module, introducing ``BinaryReader`` and
``BinaryWriter`` classes. These utilities simplify reading and writing of binary
integer data (such as ``u8``, ``u16``, ``u32``, and ``u64`` in little or big
endian) from and to Python I/O streams. CLs: `1 <https://pwrev.dev/413092>`__

.. code-block:: python

   import io
   from pw_bytes.io import BinaryReader, BinaryWriter

   stream = io.BytesIO()
   writer = BinaryWriter(stream, "little")
   writer.write_u32(0x12345678)

   stream.seek(0)
   reader = BinaryReader(stream, "little")
   val = reader.read_u32()

---------------
Developer tools
---------------

.. _changelog-2026-06-dev-ide-ui-caching:

C++ compile commands improvements in pw_ide
===========================================
Improved the Pigweed VS Code extension compile commands UI by replacing the
target selector dropdown with an interactive table showing targets, generation
times, and quick actions. In addition, atomic lockfile management (``pw.lock``)
was added to the compile commands merger to prevent concurrent compilation
database regenerations from conflicting. The compilation database Bazel aspect
in pw_ide (``pw_cc_compile_commands_aspect.bzl``) was also updated to
collect non-source generated headers (e.g. ``*.pb.h``, ``*.nanopb.h``, etc.) and
module maps (``.cppmap``) for clangd. Also added a
``display_name`` attribute to the ``pw_compile_commands_generator`` Bazel rule
to make it easier to identify target platforms in the VS Code UI. CLs: `1
<https://pwrev.dev/403398>`__, `2 <https://pwrev.dev/410732>`__, `3
<https://pwrev.dev/404076>`__

.. code-block:: bazel

   pw_compile_commands_generator(
       name = "rp2040_compile_commands",
       display_name = "RP2040",
       platform = "//targets/rp2040",
       target_patterns = ["//..."],
   )

.. _changelog-2026-06-dev-ide-rust-project-generation:

Rust IDE project generation support in pw_ide
=============================================
Added Rust IDE integration support to pw_ide, enabling rust-analyzer code
intelligence (such as autocomplete and navigation) for multi-platform Rust
targets. pw_ide now automatically generates the required
``rust-project.json`` and configuration files for multi-platform Bazel projects.
CLs: `1 <https://pwrev.dev/424613>`__

----
HALs
----

.. _changelog-2026-06-hal-i3c-driver:

New I3C driver layer in pw_i2c_mcuxpresso
=========================================
The new ``I3cDriver`` abstract interface, along with the
concrete implementations for interrupt-driven (``I3cInterruptDriver``) and
DMA-driven (``I3cDmaDriver``) transfers, allows I3C initiators to be
configured with different transfer mechanisms or custom driver implementations.
CLs: `1 <https://pwrev.dev/406192>`__

--------------------------------------
Logging, debugging, and crash handling
--------------------------------------

.. _changelog-2026-06-log-pw_assert:

New pw_assert crate
===================
The new pw_assert crate provides crash-safe assert and panic macros that
route to a central handler. This is designed for
embedded systems where standard library panics might not be suitable, or where
specific logging/recovery behavior is needed. CLs: `1
<https://pwrev.dev/420732>`__

.. code-block:: rs

   use pw_assert::assert;

   assert!(stack_start as usize % 8 == 0, "Stack start is not aligned");

.. _changelog-2026-06-log-plugin-data-fmt:

Tokenized event labels and data format plugins in pw_trace
==========================================================
Added support for custom plugin data format strings in the pw_trace Python
decoder. Clients can register custom data format handlers using
``register_plugin_data_format_handler()`` to specialize event decoding. In
addition, support for the built-in ``@pw_trace_tokenized_token_label`` format
was added to both the Python and C++ decoders (``TokenizedDecoder``) to resolve
event labels from 4-byte tokenized data fields. CLs: `1
<https://pwrev.dev/403512>`__, `2 <https://pwrev.dev/420232>`__

.. code-block:: python

   from pw_trace.trace import register_plugin_data_format_handler

   def custom_handler(event, line):
       line["args"] = {"custom": event.data.hex()}

   register_plugin_data_format_handler("@my_custom_fmt", custom_handler)

.. _changelog-2026-06-log-format-strings:

Format string support in pw_format crate
========================================
Added support for parsing and formatting format strings in the Rust
pw_format crate. The new implementation supports both ``printf``-style and
``core::fmt-style`` format string syntax. CLs: `1 <https://pwrev.dev/406372>`__

.. code-block:: rs

   use pw_format::{FormatString, FormatStyle, Arg};

   let format_str = FormatString::parse_printf("Hello %s!").unwrap();
   let args = [Arg::Str("world".to_string())];
   let formatted = format_str.format(&args, FormatStyle::Printf);
   assert_eq!(formatted, "Hello world!");

---
RPC
---

.. _changelog-2026-06-rpc-send-packet-bypass:

Unencoded packet sending in pw_rpc and pw_grpc
==============================================
Added ``SupportsSendPacket()`` and ``SendPacket()`` C++ APIs to
``pw::rpc::ChannelOutput`` to allow channel outputs to accept unencoded RPC
packets directly. This enables transports like gRPC (pw_grpc) to bypass
unnecessary buffer encoding and decoding overhead when transmitting packets.
CLs: `1 <https://pwrev.dev/410454>`__

.. code-block:: c++

   class MyChannelOutput : public pw::rpc::ChannelOutput {
     bool SupportsSendPacket() const override { return true; }
     pw::Status SendPacket(const Packet& packet) override;
   };

-----------------
Timing and clocks
-----------------

.. _changelog-2026-06-time-pw_time:

New pw_time crate
=================
The new pw_time Rust crate supports time, instants, and durations across
multiple clock domains. CLs: `1 <https://pwrev.dev/421555>`__, `2
<https://pwrev.dev/424694>`__, `3 <https://pwrev.dev/426834>`__

Example:

.. code-block:: rs

   #![no_std]
   #![no_main]

   use boot as _;
   use pw_boot::entry;
   use pw_sync_spinlock::InterruptSpinLock;
   use pw_time::{Clock, Duration, SystemClock};

   // Put loop cycle count behind a spinlock to demonstrate them working.
   static CYCLES: InterruptSpinLock<usize> = InterruptSpinLock::new(0);

   #[entry]
   fn entry() -> ! {
       pw_log::info!("Rust system clock example");

       loop {
           let start = SystemClock::now();
           {
               let mut cycles = CYCLES.lock();
               *cycles += 1;
               pw_log::info!("Loop: {}", *cycles as usize);
           }

           while SystemClock::now() - start < Duration::from_millis(1000) {
               core::hint::spin_loop();
           }
       }
   }

------------
Tokenization
------------

.. _changelog-2026-06-token-rust-detokenizer:

Rust detokenization support in pw_tokenizer
===========================================
Added initial Rust detokenization support to the ``pw_tokenizer`` crate. The
Rust ``Detokenizer`` supports loading token databases from both CSV and binary
formats, configuring custom prefix characters (``from_csv_with_prefix()`` and
``from_binary_with_prefix()``), and detokenizing text. In addition, error
formatting behavior matches the C++ version using ``DetokenizeAttempt`` and
``DecodedFormatString`` to retain original ``printf`` conversion specifiers or
render inline error descriptors when token arguments fail to decode. CLs: `1
<https://pwrev.dev/406283>`__, `2 <https://pwrev.dev/417212>`__, `3
<https://pwrev.dev/426652>`__, `4 <https://pwrev.dev/426853>`__, `5
<https://pwrev.dev/426854>`__, `6 <https://pwrev.dev/429372>`__

.. code-block:: rs

   let detok = Detokenizer::from_binary_with_prefix(bin_data, '~')?;
   let result = detok.detokenize_text("~#00000001");

.. _changelog-2026-06-token-asterisk-modifiers:

Asterisk width and precision in C++ and Python detokenizers
===========================================================
Updated the C++ and Python detokenizers in pw_tokenizer to support asterisk
(``*``) width and precision format modifiers (such as ``%*d``, ``%.*s``, and
``%*.*f``). When detokenizing, the decoders now dynamically decode varint
arguments for width and precision and handle negative precision values according
to the C99 ``printf`` standard. CLs: `1 <https://pwrev.dev/415137>`__, `2
<https://pwrev.dev/414492>`__

.. _changelog-2026-06-token-enum-source-set:

New pw_cc_enum_source_set template in GN and CMake
==================================================
Introduced the ``pw_cc_enum_source_set`` GN template and updated CMake enum
generation functions in pw_enum. The new build templates automatically
generate internal enum tokenization rules and expose generated headers cleanly
across public and private dependency boundaries.
CLs: `1 <https://pwrev.dev/416732>`__

.. code-block:: py

   pw_cc_enum_source_set("my_enums") {
     enum_headers = [ "public/my_enums.h" ]
     include_dirs = [ "public" ]
   }

.. _changelog-2026-06-token-versioned-enum-domain-tokens:

Versioned enum domain tokenization in pw_tokenizer and pw_log
=============================================================
Added support for versioned enum domain tokenization and logging across
pw_tokenizer, pw_enum, and pw_log. The new ``EnumDomainToken<T>()``
template and ``PW_TOKENIZER_ENUM_DOMAIN_AND_VALUE`` macro resolve both an enum's
32-bit domain token and its value token at compile time. In addition,
``PW_LOG_ENUM_VERSIONED`` and ``PwEnumDomainName`` enable logging versioned
enums reliably across both tokenizing and non-tokenizing logging backends. CLs:
`1 <https://pwrev.dev/419417>`__, `2 <https://pwrev.dev/419416>`__, `3
<https://pwrev.dev/419415>`__, `4 <https://pwrev.dev/423352>`__

.. code-block:: c++

   #include "pw_log/tokenized_args.h"

   PW_LOG_INFO("State " PW_LOG_ENUM_VERSIONED_FMT() ": received packet",
               PW_LOG_ENUM_VERSIONED(state));

------------------------
Toolchains and compilers
------------------------

.. _changelog-2026-06-toolchain-elf-builder:

New pw_elf Python package for building ELF files
================================================
Added the pw_elf Python package for programmatically building ELF32 and
ELF64 binary files from scratch. The library introduces ``ElfBuilder`` for
constructing custom ELF binaries with memory regions and notes, as well as the
``CoredumpBuilder`` subclass for generating crash coredumps with ARM32 register
dumps (``PRSTATUS`` notes) and GNU build IDs. CLs: `1
<https://pwrev.dev/413112>`__, `2 <https://pwrev.dev/413452>`__

.. code-block:: python

   from pw_elf.builder import ElfBuilder, ElfClass, ElfMachine, ElfType
   from pw_elf.coredump import CoredumpBuilder

   builder = CoredumpBuilder(ElfMachine.ARM, ElfClass.CLASS32, "little")
   builder.add_thread(thread_id=123, registers=regs)

.. _changelog-2026-06-toolchain-gcc15-freestanding:

Disabled -ffreestanding by default in arm_gcc Bazel builds
==========================================================
Disabled ``-ffreestanding`` by default for the ``arm_gcc`` toolchain in
Pigweed's Bazel builds. With the transition to GCC 15, the updated ``libstdc++``
enforces stricter compliance checks that fail when freestanding mode is enabled
by default. Projects requiring freestanding mode can re-enable it in
``.bazelrc`` via ``common --//pw_toolchain/arm_gcc:freestanding=True``. CLs: `1
<https://pwrev.dev/425592>`__

.. code-block:: none

   # To re-enable freestanding mode in your project's .bazelrc:
   common --//pw_toolchain/arm_gcc:freestanding=True

.. _changelog-2026-06-toolchain-bazel-compilation-mode:

Bazel compilation mode support for host_clang toolchain
=======================================================
Added ``opt_feature``, ``dbg_feature``, and ``fastbuild_feature`` to the
``host_clang`` toolchain in pw_toolchain. This enables Bazel's standard
``--compilation_mode=opt`` (or ``-c opt``) flag to apply ``-O2`` optimizations
during host builds while preserving default debugging symbols. CLs: `1
<https://pwrev.dev/410698>`__

.. code-block:: console

   bazelisk build --compilation_mode=opt //...

.. _changelog-2026-06-toolchain-lifetime-attributes:

Lifetime safety attributes in pw_preprocessor
=============================================
Added C++ lifetime safety checking attributes to pw_preprocessor:

* ``PW_ATTRIBUTE_VIEW`` for non-owning reference types like spans or string
  views
* ``PW_ATTRIBUTE_OWNER`` for container or smart pointer types that own their
  data
* ``PW_INTERNAL_ATTRIBUTE_CAPTURED_BY`` for function parameters captured by
  another entity, such as ``this`` or another parameter

These macros wrap Clang and GSL lifetime attributes to help compilers diagnose
dangling references and returning addresses of stack memory. CLs: `1
<https://pwrev.dev/414333>`__

.. code-block:: c++

   struct PW_ATTRIBUTE_VIEW StringView {
     template <class R>
     StringView(const R&);
   };

   struct PW_ATTRIBUTE_OWNER String {};
